## Time Series Prediction Models for the Interest Rates of Tesouro Direto’s IPCA Securities
#### [Published Paper (PT-BR)](http://dx.doi.org/10.21528/CBIC2021-11)

Launched by the Brazilian Federal Government at the end of 2002, the Tesouro Direto platform makes it possible for individuals to purchase government securities, characterizing it as a safe fixed-income investment that is more profitable than savings. Considering the variations that the interest rates of these securities undergo over time, there is the possibility of obtaining profits above the initially agreed upon purchase/sale rate at the right time. Thus, this work proposes the use of machine learning models, more precisely the MLP, CNN and LSTM neural networks, in an attempt to create a model for forecasting the interest rates of four floating-rate Brazilian government securities bonded to the country’s inflation rate (IPCA). To this end, some features of the Brazilian economy that could have a more direct impact on Tesouro Direto rates were analyzed and defined. Computer simulations were performed with variations in the presence of these features in the datasets, so that the best prediction model could be identified. In the end, it was concluded that CNN has a better overall result, even though it is more sensitive to feature removal. In contrast, the MLP presents almost constant errors, regardless of the variable being removed. In addition, it was found that the CDI, an important investment metric, has a negative impact on the forecasting capacity of the models, due to its proximity in value to the Selic rate.

---

## Modelos de Previsão de Séries Temporais das Taxas de Juros do Tesouro Direto
#### [Artigo Publicado](http://dx.doi.org/10.21528/CBIC2021-11)

Lançada pelo Governo Federal brasileiro no final de 2002, a plataforma Tesouro Direto possibilita a compra de títulos públicos por pessoas físicas, caracterizando-o como um investimento de renda fixa seguro e mais rentável que a poupança. Este trabalho propôs a utilização de modelos de aprendizado de máquina, mais precisamente das redes neurais MLP, CNN e LSTM, para criar modelos de previsão das taxas de juros de quatro títulos pós-fixados do Tesouro Direto atrelados ao IPCA. Para isso, foram analisadas e definidas algumas features (características) da economia brasileira que poderiam impactar mais diretamente nas taxas do Tesouro Direto. Ao final, concluiu-se que a CNN apresenta um melhor resultado geral, mesmo se mostrando mais sensível à remoção de features. Em contrapartida, a MLP apresentou erros quase constantes, independentemente da variável que estava sendo removida.
